[New Tutorial] Annotate, prepare tests and publish on workflow registries Galaxy workflows (#6119)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/galaxy-interface/tutorials/workflow-fairification/tutorial.md

level: Intermediate
subtopic: workflows
---

Research data is accumulating at an unprecedented rate, presenting significant challenges for achieving fully reproducible science. As a result, implementing high-quality management of scientific data has become a global priority. One key aspect of this effort is the use of computational workflows, which describe the complex, multi-step methods used for data analysis. In Galaxy, workflows are a powerful feature that allows researchers to link multiple steps of complex analyses seamlessly. To maximize their impact, these workflows should adhere to best practices that make them **FAIR: Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable**.

The FAIR principles —-Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable—- provide practical guidelines for enhancing the value of research data:

- **Findable**: Easy to locate through rich metadata and unique identifiers.
- **Accessible**: Stored in a way that allows them to be retrieved by those who need them.
- **Interoperable**: Usable across different systems and platforms without extensive adaptation.
- **Reusable**: Well-documented and clearly licensed to enable reuse in different contexts.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> <comment-title></comment-title>
> You can learn more about FAIR Data, Workflows, and Research in our [dedicated topic with numerous tutorials]({% link topics/fair/index.md %})
{: .comment}
```

- Tip 5 (**Interoperability**): *"The tools integrated in a workflow should adhere to file format standards."*
- Tip 6 (**Interoperability**): *"Make the workflow portable."*
- Tip 7 (**Reusability**): *"Provide a reproducible computational environment to run the workflow."*
- Tip 8 (**Reusability**): *"Add a configuration file with defaults."*
- Tip 9 (**Reusability**): *"Modularize the workflow."*

In this tutorial, we will demonstrate how to fulfill the remaining tips:
- Tip 1 (**Findability**): *"Register the workflow."*
- Tip 2 (**Findability**): *"Describe the workflow with rich metadata."*
- Tip 3 (**Accessibility**): *"Make source code available in a public code repository."*
- Tip 4 (**Accessibility**): *"Provide example input data and results along with the workflow."*
- Tip 10 (**Reusability**): *"Provide clear and concise workflow documentation."*

To illustrate the process, we will use a simple workflow with 2 steps as an example.

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Prepare the workflow

> Here, we will use a workflow running FastQC and MultiQC but you can use your own workflow.

Reviewer 2: Can we use Falco instead of FastQC? Or Fastp?

Reviewer: Can Falco output be used in MultiQC? I can not find Falco in the list of tools in MultiQC

Reviewer: Will try then

> <hands-on-title>Open workflow attributes</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Click on **Attributes** on the left side of the workflow editor (or right side for older Galaxy version for clicking on {% icon galaxy-pencil %} **Edit Attributes**)
{: .hands_on}

Some workflow metadata should appear.

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> 1. What is the name of the workflow?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> > 1. "Unnamed Workflow"
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

Metadata should include details about the workflow's components and clearly outline its purpose, scope, and limitations. This ensures the workflow is easily findable and understandable. 

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> Which metadata is supported in Galaxy workflow interface?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> > Galaxy workflow interface supports:
> > - Name
> > - Version
> > - Annotation: These notes will be visible when this workflow is viewed.
> > - License
> > - Creator: Either a person or an organization. 
> > - Tags: Apply tags to make it easy to search for and find items with the same tag. 
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> Galaxy workflow interface supports some metadata. Are they enough to fulfill Tip 2 and also Tip 1 *"Register the workflow."*. WorkflowHub, a workflow registry we will explain more later, supports the [following metadata](https://about.workflowhub.eu/docs/metadata-list/):

Reviewer 2: > Galaxy workflow interface supports some metadata. Are they enough to fulfill Tip 2 and also Tip 1 *"Register the workflow."*. 

Is that a question?

> Galaxy workflow interface supports some metadata. Are they enough to fulfill Tip 2 and also Tip 1 *"Register the workflow."*. WorkflowHub, a workflow registry we will explain more later, supports the [following metadata](https://about.workflowhub.eu/docs/metadata-list/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Galaxy workflow interface supports some metadata, enough to fulfill Tip 2 and also Tip 1 (*"Register the workflow."*). WorkflowHub, a workflow registry we will explain more later, supports the [following metadata](https://about.workflowhub.eu/docs/metadata-list/):
```

**Sharing** | Specify who can view the summary, get access to the content, and edit the Workflow. This is possibly already filled in according to the selected project. | No
**Tags** | Choose an appropriate tag for your workflow. Please check if your tag is already available and use the existing one if so. If you make a new tag, keep it simple without capitals or spaces. For example all new covid-19 workflows need to be tagged with covid-19. | No
**Creators** | This is an important section where all the people that were involved in making / publishing this workflow are listed. | No

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> 1. Which WorkflowHub metadata is supported in Galaxy workflow interface?
> 2. Which values should we put for our workflow?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > Workflow metadata | Galaxy metadata | Mapping workflow value
> > --- | --- | ---
> > Title | Name | Quality control and mapping
> > Description | Annotation | Workflow runs quality control and mapping of paired-end short-reads data.
> > Source | *Not supported in Galaxy workflow interface* | 
> > Teams | *Not supported in Galaxy workflow interface* | 
> > License | License | MIT License

> > > Sharing | *Not supported in Galaxy workflow interface* | 

Reviewer 2: We can share workflows, it just works differently between both systems.

I'm not sure if its super useful to compare both metadata systems. Things like Teams/Source etc. only makes sense on the workflowhub side.

> > Tags | Tags | `sequence-analysis`, `mapping`
> > Creators | Creator | 
> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

Let's annotate the workflow

> <hands-on-title>Add metadata to the workflow</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Add a proper title in **Name**
> 2. Add a workflow description in **Annotation**
> 3. Select a license in **License**
>
>    > <comment-title></comment-title>
>    > The most appropriate **license** are **MIT** or **GNU Affero** (if you want a [copyleft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft)).
>    {: .comment}
>
> 4. Add creators in **Creator** with their name and a unique identifier (typically an orcid.org ID)
>
>    > <comment-title></comment-title>
>    > Do not forget to click on **Save**
>    {: .comment}
>
> 5. Add tags in **Tags**
> 6. Save the workflow
{: .hands_on}

Tip 2 is now fulfilled. We can now move toward the other left tips:

- Tip 1 (**Findability**): *"Register the workflow."*
- Tip 3 (**Accessibility**): *"Make source code available in a public code repository."*
- Tip 4 (**Accessibility**): *"Provide example input data and results along with the workflow."*
- Tip 10 (**Reusability**): *"Provide clear and concise workflow documentation."*

>    The workflow annotation provides a short and concise description of the workflow. So Tip 10 is partially fullfilled. In addition to the workflow annotation, each step could annotated so users could have an idea about the purpose of the steps

Reviewer 2: Can we mention here the fancy new workflow annotations from Laila as well? markdown inside the workflow, color encoded separations etc ... they are Galaxy specific but are imho also enhancing the documentation.

   > <details-title>Add step descriptions to fulfill Tip 10</details-title>
   > 
   > Let's add label and annotation to each step.
   >
   > > <hands-on-title>Add FastQC label and step annotation</hands-on-title>
   > >
   > > 1. Click on **FastQC**
   > > 2. Fill in **Label** with `Quality control` in the right panel
   > > 3. Fill in **Step Annotation** with `This step uses FastQC to generate statistics of raw reads quality including basic statistics, per base sequence quality, per sequence quality scores, adapter content, etc.`
   > > 4. Save the workflow
   > {: .hands_on}
   > 
   > We can now do the same for MultiQC.
   {: .details}

> To achive Tip 1 and register the workflow, we will first need to fulfill Tips 3 and 4. Before, we need to be sure that the workflow adheres to best practices for Galaxy workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we care about Tip 3 and 4, lets use the build-in Galaxy Wizard to check if our workflow adheres to best practices of Galaxy workflows.
```

# Adhere to best practices for Galaxy workflows

> There are a number of things the user interface of Galaxy will allow that are not considered best practices because they make the workflow harder to test, use within subworkflows and invocation reports, and consume via the API. It is easier to use workflows in all of these contexts if they stick to the [best practices developed by the commmunity](https://planemo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices_workflows.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Galaxy has a build-in Wizard to check against [community developed best practice workflows](https://planemo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best_practices_workflows.html). It will recommend to use a License, add Authors etc but also ensures that workflows are easy to test, that they are usable as subworkflows and invocation reports, and can be consumed easily via an API. The reusablility will be greatly enhanced if you stick to those recommendations.
```

1. Check for workflow eligibility
2. Ensure workflows follow best-practices (already done)
3. Generate tests

## Check for workflow eligibility

IWC collects production workflows targeted at users that want to analyze their own data. As such, the workflow should be sufficiently generic that users can provide their own data.

IWC encourage, but do not require, links to related Galaxy Training Network Tutorials. Importantly, each workflow should be described in a way that a user can run the workflow on their own data without modifying the workflow. If we want to deposit a workflow that accompanies a tutorial we have to make sure that the workflow does not refer to datasets that only make sense in the context of the tutorial.

By fulfilling the first Tips as we did before, we guarantee for workflow eligibility.

## Generate tests

This is usually the most difficult part and we encourage all new contributors to IWC to propose their workflows even if they did not managed to generate tests. However, the publication of these workflow will be speed up if tests are already present. 

### Find input datasets

> To test the workflow, we need input datasets. By fulfilling Tip 4 (*"Provide example input data and results along with the workflow."*), we generated a toy dataset. We now need to publish it to [**Zenodo**](https://zenodo.org/) to have a permanent URL, also allowing others to **easily retrieve and reuse the data** when running or validating the workflow.

Reviewer 2: In https://github.com/galaxyproject/training-material/pull/6119/files#diff-73ef156f75f9e4388f6473b70c13db1b5d26115d1f1007db168182ad6e858725R335 we already had test data?

Should we move this paragraph up?
